# Interview with Terry Davis

## By usesthis.com in 2014 May the fifth

> [source](https://usesthis.com/interviews/terry.davis/)

*UT*: Who are you, and what do you do?

*TD*: My name's Terry Davis. I was chosen by God to make His temple, an [operating system](https://templeos.org). I made a complete operating system including making the tools. It has a kernel and 64-bit compiler. It also has an oracle for talking with God.

*UT*: What hardware do you use?

*TD*: My PC is a Windows 7 desktop with an i7, 3.40GHz CPU, 8GB of RAM. It's a Dell.

I have a Sony stand-alone hand-held voice recorder.

*UT*: And what software?

*TD*: I do almost all of my development in TempleOS with my own compiler, editor and tools. I use Windows for browsing the web with Internet Explorer.

I use Windows to help make videos for TempleOS. In TempleOS, I capture BMP files while recording my voice on the hand-held voice recorder. I use FFmpeg to convert my BMP files into a AVI movie. I use Audacity to convert my voice track to stereo and mix it with my TempleOS .SND output file. I mix AVI and WAV files into one file with Full Video Audio Mixer, a Windows program I bought.

I use VMware Workstation 8.0.6 because TempleOS won't run natively. I use the old VMware version because the PC speaker does not work in the new version.

*UT*: What would be your dream setup?

*TD*: I would like Windows to abolish Secure-Boot, so I can run Win8 dual booted with TempleOS. I would like a machine with a disk controller and BIOS that used ATA/ATAPI PIO and a BIOS which also supported legacy PS/2 keyboard/mouse emulation, so I could run TempleOS natively. I am aware of a 70 core Knights Landing Intel CPU coming-out. That might be nice.


