# Evaluate possible methods of government intervention to control household energy bills in the UK

<details><summary>Extra:</summary>
Sources used:

- [BBC](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-60295177)
- [Tutor2U](https://www.tutor2u.net/economics/reference/energy-price-cap-analysis-and-evaluation-arguments)
- [Tutor2U](https://www.tutor2u.net/economics/reference/economics-of-an-energy-fuel-price-cap)
<details><summary>Mark Scheme Stuff</summary>
Gov. intervention include:

- price regulation e.g. energy cap
- direct support from gov. to households
- grants/subsidies
- enhancing competition through promotion of small businesses'breaking up large energy suppliers
- state ownership arguments
- threat of windfall tax which forces companies to pass on falls in wholesale costs to households
> Windfall tax is a levy imposed by governments on companies that have benefited from something they were not responsible for - in other words- a windfall.
Energy firm profits soared because of rising demand after Covid restrictions were lifted, and then because of Russia-Ukraine raised energy prices.
The
- seperate retail and wholesale divisions
- education/information campaigns to help households reduce energy usage
- CMA investigation into price fixing/collusive behaviour
- Legislation to decouple gas and electric prices
- Encouragement of smart meters to reduce information gaps

Evaluation include:

- Asymmetric informaion
- Regulatory Capture
- Time lags
- Prioritisation arguments
- SR vs LR
- Combination of policies required
- Government failure
- Unintended consequences e.g. energy retailers leave markets
- Cost and opportunity cost arguments
- Scale of support needed could change
- Other sources of gas supply
- Depends on type of tariff e.g. pre-payment meters are more expensive
- Depends on type of household

Methods of gov. intervention may include:

- Indirect taxation e.g. tax on petrol & diesel or new car sales

<summary>*MACRO* effects:</summary>
Capped energy prices may help to control the annual rate of inflation. Household fuel bills are RELATIVELY HEAVILY WEIGHED items in the calculation of the consumer price index. Depending on how fast wages and earnings are rising in nominal terms, a fall in the inflation rate might lead to an increase in real disposable incomes for many households which would then contribute to an increase in consumer spending on other goods and services. An energy price cap might therefore contribe to increased retail sales and a faster rate of economic growth in the short term. Households might also be able to put a little more away each month to help build up their savings.

However, although an energy price cap might lift consumer spending on goods and services, putting a ceiling on energy bills might have a negative effect on business investment, which is also a component part of AD (C + I + G + (X - M).

For example the profit margins of energy companies are relatively low (less than five percent of operating cost), if their prices are capped, they might have less profit available to fund infrastructure spending to maintain and  improve the energy distribution network. And lower energy prices might also reduce the profitability of investment in alternative forms of renewable energy such as off-shore wind, tidal and solar power. Some energy firms such as N-Power, have announced big reductions in employment and a fall in the number of people employed in this sector could have negative multiplier effects.
</details>

<!-- !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! -->

## Introduction

Interventionist supply-side policies are methods governments use to increase provision of goods/services. This is done for a number of reasons such as
The average UK household energy bill (gas and electric combined) rose 80% from £1971 in 2021 to £3549 in 2022.

## Paragraph 1

Subsidising energy firms, is one possible interventionist method to control _household energy bills_ in the UK. Subsidies are financial grants or tax breaks awarded to firms in order to increase output or reduce production costs. Were, energy firms the recipients of government subsidies we can expect costs such as variable costs, e.g. decreasing. In turn, firms now have a greater ability to offset savings onto conusmers, via a reduced price, so as to gain market share. This can be seen diagrametically, where P1 shifts inwards to P2. Use ceteris paribus

However, subsidies may work against in the long-run. Lobbying to maintain subsidy payout, reduces government finance to other key . Subsidies may not be linked to the level of output, 
The MacSharry reforms say direct payments not tied down to the level of output, decoupling, to ensure there is no misallocation of scarce resources and over production, Moreover, fair subsiidies high degree of normativity, "fairer energy prices", assymetric information

## Paragraph 2

Alternatively, price caps - legal price ceilings set by industry regulators, can be enforced onto energy markets. In theory, this ensures suppliers cannot charge an unfair rate on each unit of energy consumed. In prcitce


Alternatively price caps, legal price ceilings set by industry regulators can be applied onto energy markets.  Although, in theroy price-caps are intended to protect against over charing anad ensure that energy suppliers cannot charge an unfair rate on each unit of energy used. In practise, energy suppliers cannot  always survive price caps, as seen with Baob who left the market.
However, price caps may incentivise energy suppliers to cut losses elsewhere and increase their productivity. Yet the same argument can be applied, if profits are reduced where is the financing of research and development to come from, it may be difficult to encourage shareholders to invest if your supernormal profits have been reduced.  Profits are already low, wholesale cast (purchasing energy) 37 percent, network costs (supply transmissions, distribution and  metering) 26, supplier profit margins are only five percent, excluding other costs


Moreover, were firms to cut losses in regards to worker rages, it may demoralise them in regards to any research and development they undergo. Although, it is not unheard of energy suppliers succesfully cutting losses when it comes to referral programs such as Octopus energy slashing their "refer a friend" scheme.
Cut core operational cost, quality of service decreases?
Moreover, it can be difficult to assess what is thee right pricee cap when taking in the right level that firms are still operationally active, it is not always in the best interest of energy firms to pravido regulators such as ofgem with all relevant data.
Furthermore, in microeconomics the law of supply states that, all other things being equal, the quantity of a good or sirvce that suppliers are willing and able to offer for sale increases as its price rises and decreases as its price falls, Homever were costs of production to indcrease, the supply curve shifts to the left, meaning that at each price level, suppliers are willing to supply less of the good or service than previous. For example the lower profit margins coming from price caps, means that an increase in production costs means that suppliers have to spend more money to produce the same amount of output. If they maintain the same price, their profit marggins will be lower, which might not be acceptable. 
Ofgem, sets MP on each kwH of energy used, this may disproportionately affect large families

auditing is more expensive
t, what happens once the price cap is lifted and the market becomes more oligopoliistic
If you drawa a monopoly diagram with a price cap at allocative efficiency, this means less supernormal profit to reinvest, I took a picture of this diagram. However, firms may simply cut losses elsewhere, 
However, price caps may encourage energy suppliers to increase their productivity efficiency lower LRAC, to improve profits.
Price cap might hurt competition by reducing profits and lowering the incentive for new challenger firms to enter industry 

If markets leave what happens when a price cap is lifted
## Paragraph 3 challenger

Alternatively, it may be best for the government to intervene as little as possible within the energy markets, rather it may be best for governments to focus attention on _helping_ consumers achieve a lower energy bill than "controlling" it. For example new builds due to modern insulation triple glazing etc, may require less energy, large vs small houeholds, location wise rural vs urban, Were the government to direct attention towards said, households may indirectly experience reduced energy bills, without the need for government control.

 The Big Six suppliers such as, have substantial market power within an oligoploy and this scap may mean that they cannot charge a profit-maximising price for electricty and gas at an output where MC=MR.
As a result, there will be an increase in consumer surplis (the difference between ability to pay and what is actually paid) and a lso a possible reduction in fuel povrty among lower incoome househodls.  fuel povorty happens when a family needs to spend more than ten percent of their income to maintain an adequate heating regime.
If firms cannot raise prices as a result they face falling profits

Talk about different family sizes

In a digram,, there is a zero-profit point, profit zone and shudown point shutdown zone

and also an inbetween of los but continue operating in short run zone, which is found on page 5

Draw arrow on monopoly diagram. On the maximum price diagram, PS shrinks, Cs increases, yet the
quality-of-service decreases> Consumers only GET QS.

This increased the concentration ration, collusion more likely, higher prices in the future, 23 energy
companies shut down, yet the higher cs helps lower income? Yet ultimately greater job uncertainty for

 State provision of public goods/common goods, taxation often involves a high level of value judgement
for example, teresa may’s energy subsidy focused primarily on making it “fairer”

Invisible hand – tendency of free markets to regulate themselves by means of competition, supply and
d


If there is subnormal  profits this is both a signal and incentive for firms to exit in the short run

page 33 has a diagram for this 

page 34 

]aw of unintended consesquences firms facing a decline in supernormal profits can disincentives to innovate and invest, leading to less research and development,  


## Economics of a price cap 

One microeconomic effect is to reduce supernormal profits of some of the leading energy suppliers. 
Eval point,
the micro impact of the price cap depends on how cloose it is to the avergae fuel bill for households and the coverage

Some suppliers may raise the price  of theiri other tariffs and other suppliers may respond to the price cap by cutting operating costs and increasing productivityso that profit margins are maintained.

However, the industry regulator OFGEM has set a price cap that is fairly high and it save the average household only around £75 per year. They have also said that the cap will be reviewed and changed up to two times a year depending on fluctuations in the international price of oil and gas. One might argue that the cap is an example of regulatory failure with the regulator operating mainly in the interests of oligopolistic energy suppliers rather than energy users.
Gas and electricity currently provide around 80-85% of UK fuel consumption. Coal is now less than 1 per cent.

The gas and electricity industry is an oligopoly. Although there are now 69 active suppliers in the industry, the Big Six energy companies have more than 80 percent of the market.

Households spend - in total - over £30 billion a year on energy for their homes

Big Six: Control 81% of gas supply and 80% of electricity

Centrica
EDF
E.ON
N-power
SSE
Scottish Power
Challenger suppliers in market (over 60 smaller firms)

First Utility (now owned by Royal Dutch Shell plc
Cooperative Energy
Octopus Energy
OVO Energy
May
The make up of a fuel bill
The composition of a fuel bill is approximately as follows (Source: OFGEM and Parliament Research):
share
Other costs - including the impact of government climate change policies
Arguments for an energy price cap
Cap protects consumers from over-charging due to market power of the Big 6 suppliers who make high profits
High fuel bills hurt lower-income families who are at greater risk of fuel poverty
The cap can be temporary & lifted if competition improves

Better long-run strategy is to focus on nationwide housing insulation programme to improver energy efficiency

Policies likely to be effective in driving improvements in energy efficiency thereby helping 

In conclusion, whether the government can or cannot succesfully "controll" household energy bills relies on how long? Any government intervention in markets theer is usually at least one and often many unintended consequences, not foreseen. Partly because economics is a social science and we cannot acurately predict  or theorise how producers and consumers will react to an intervention. 
information
Overall, an increase in production costs reduces the incentive for suppliers to supply a given good or service. As a result, they are likely to supply less of it at each price level. regressive
In 2015, 2.5 million people lived in households defined as in fuel poverty - i.e. where more than 10 percent of annual income was needed to maintain a reasonable household temperature.

