# Evaluate the likely effects of an increase in protectionism on the economy of a developing country of your choice

> Since the global financial crisis of 2008 there have been over 5,700 increases in tariffs, quotas and administrative controls on international trade

A likely effect of an increase in protectionism in Uganda, are infant industries i.e. "domestic clothing" developing economices of scale. Protectionist measures, such as imposing quotas/tariffs on foreign imports i.e. "second-hand Western clothing" coould shield domestic from unintentional predatory pricing. Tariffs on cheaper second-hand clothing will create a price mark-up shifting P1 to P2. Quotas/Administrative controls reducing quantity supplied, will move Q1 to Q2. In theory, ceteris paribus, demand will chase the lower priced good i.e. "domestic Ugandan clothing" which now appear more attractive to Ugandan consumers. Therefore, Ugandan may experience economic growth such as real GDP increasing. Moreover, if domestic firms have a larger market share this may mean there are less leakages in the economy and if injections exceed leakages national output (gbp) will increase.

However, classical liberal economists may argue that an increase in protectionism may have negative effects on the Ugandan economy such as a decrease in productivity. Protectionist policies may enable inefficient firms to exiist, which couold lead to a misallocation oof scarce resources i.e. "water and cotton". Productivity may decrease if Uganda's efficiency in which capital and labour are combined produce less with the same level of factor inputs. This may lead to slower economic growth, with effects including: less tax  revenue for welfare projects, slower increase in living standards and an increase in government borrowing which may run Uganda into a fiscal deficit. Moreover, in the long-run inefficient industries may lobby governments to ensure protectionist measures persist,  which could prolong aforementioned effects.

Another likely effect is an increase in employment. The Frazer Garth Economic Journal showed that cheap foreign imports reduced employment in the Ugandan garment industry by a half. If Ugandan firms develop economies of scale they may choose to employ more workers, decreasing national unemployment. This may increase consumption as a higher percentile of the population have incomes, meaning teir money can be spent elsewhere in the economy. This may shift AD1 to AD2, indiicating an increase in consumption which can increase GDP.

However in the short run there may be high levels of frictional unemployment and a decrease in consumption. Protectionist measures, may see TNC's exit the Ugandan market, which  may lead to high-skilled Ugandans with higher amaunts of disposable income becoming unemployed. This means that there may be a decrease in consumer spending, as there are less peoople with disposable incomes and the time delays in searching for new work could see AD1 shift inwards to AD3, perhaps further inwards too AD4 as highly-skilled workers for TNC's have higher disposable incomes, which is not being spent elsewhere in the economy.


An additional likely effect is an increase in exports, in the long-run. The argument being- that protectionist measures provide infant industries a larger market share, ceteris paribus, profits will increase allowing for these firms to invest more in capital and research and development. This is best seen through the Japaneese car industry. Prior to being classified as developed in 1992, Japan fully halted the import of foreign cars, which allowed the Japanes car industry to improve through technological and performance advancements - making Japanese cars more attractive internationally. The same principle can be applied to Ugandan clothing- in the long-run demand may increase internationally for Ugandan clothing allowing Uganda to export more garments internationally.
However foreign clothing facilitates competition and protectionist measures retain inefficient firms. Therefore, Ugandan clothing may not meetcinternational standards - seeing no increase in clothing exports in the long/short run. A stagnation of technological advancements may occur as firms could have no incentive to re-invest earnings into R&D as there is no international competition.
