Innocecence to Experience:
	"Dread of conflict" exemplify complacency of appeasement/interwar years.
	Prefers to consider "re-armament" and the "abyssina question" "simply not
	a subject". By contrast, contemporary readers are acutely aware of the "hideous century" that awaits, the universal movement from I to E, when the "sight of a corpse becomes a banality".

hey are on the cusp of adolescence and sexual awareness, yet through an emotionally distant, lonely childhood, suggested by Briony’s “hard-faced dolls, the estranged companions of a childhood she considered closed”, are unfamiliar with intimate human interaction, especially of a sexual nature. “Vague and ill-defined,” not only does their perception of sex reveal innocence in their lack of experience, but also exposes ignorance in their misconceptions. While Briony may consider “sexual bliss” to be “as yet unthinkable”; remote, alien and unfamiliar, she still strongly associates it with evil as shown by her reaction to the word “cunt” in Robbie’s letter: “That the word had been written by a man confessing to an image in his mind… disgusted her profoundly.” From there it is a short leap of her “over-anxious imagination” to begin considering him “the incarnation of evil.”

he bridge that Briony crosses having been given the fateful note also represents a transition from innocence to experience, both in the crossing of the sexual boundary in Cecilia and Robbie’s relationship that the note instigates, and in the irreversible transition that Briony makes from passive observer to guilty participant.

Briony similarly renounces her simplistic fairytales for “the real, the adult world in which frogs do not address princesses” in the belief that “it was right, it was essential, for her to know everything.” However, it is precisely these innocent childish imaginings, these constructed worlds of perfection, which prevent Briony and Leo from grasping the complex reality of the adult world which they seek to comprehend.

Briony has a similar “love of order”, reflected in both the military arrangement of her toys and in her childhood stories, by which “Her passion for tidiness was also satisfied, for an unruly world could be made just so.” This “controlling demon” leads to her incomprehension of the fountain scene – “The sequence was illogical – the drowning scene, followed by a rescue, should have preceded the marriage proposal” – and so her disastrous attempt to superimpose her world of fiction upon reality, for “Order must be imposed.” Therefore it is the sudden shift from the expectations derived from their childhood fantasies to reality itself that lead to Briony and Leo’s loss of innocence: in the former’s case, the lifelong burden of guilt that her crime, stemming from incomprehension and misinterpretation, incurs.

Briony too seeks the ultimate knowledge and power of the novelist, a concept demonstrated extensively by Atonement’s omniscient narrator (ultimately Briony herself) and stream of consciousness style. “In a story you only had to wish, you only had to write it down and you could have the world.” Briony finds this neatness of novel writing preferable to the chaos – “the messiness of other minds” – inherent in play writing. However, while the solipsistic power and knowledge of the omniscient narrator appeals to Briony, she is at age thirteen “not worthy of it. She could never forgive Robbie his disgusting mind.” Although Briony desires the ultimate knowledge of the novelist, her innocence (or perhaps more accurately, ignorance) prevents her from obtaining it: for while her ill-informed notions of sex prevent her from forgiving Robbie, she cannot understand him, and thus the omniscience she seeks is denied. Only at age seventy-seven, with a lifetime of experience and knowledge, is she worthy of the novelist’s power, with which she can finally give Cecilia and Robbie the reprieve they deserved: “As long as there is a single copy, a solitary typescript of my final draft, then my spontaneous, fortuitous sister and her medical prince survive to love.” Atonement’s irreligious depiction of the novelist as a superhuman being – “with her absolute power of deciding outcomes, she is also God” – reflects McEwan’s atheism (subtly alluded to by “novelists, even if they are atheists”). T

 Of all emotions, lust and sexual love are most suppressed, as demonstrated by the atmospheric dinner scene in Atonement. “The effect of suffocation” mirrors the repression of the main characters as beneath the superficial decorum of etiquette, their minds are completely occupied by sex: Cecilia, Robbie and Briony are “lost to the events of ten minutes before,” while “Lola was subdued both by the shock of physical assault and an array of contradictory emotions”.

 Briony too is kept entirely “innocent of salacious matters” by the adults of her society, and is similarly mystified by the word “cunt”: “what did the word contain?” “Naturally, she had never heard the word spoken, or seen it in print, or come across it in asterisks. No one in her presence had ever referred to the word’s existence… not even her mother”. Thus children are kept in the darkness of ignorance; a permanent state of enforced innocence, with disastrous consequences: “If only she, Briony, had been less innocent, less stupid.” In the worlds of both novels, women are also expected to be innocent, for in a society that considers the loss of a woman’s virginity a fate “worse than death,” small tokens of independence, such as “being seen with a sandwich in the street”, or wearing practical “tights” for bicycling, are considered “not quite-quite” or “fast”. Shielded from experience and knowledge, for “They weren’t even awarding girls proper degrees”, women’s position in society is represented by Emily. Placid and deferential to her husband's will, she neither desires nor seeks knowledge, preferring to be ignorant, even of his affair, as “She had sources of contentment… and she intended to preserve them by not challenging Jack.” Similarly, she is later denied access to the obscene letter by the “chivalrous unease” of the “three men’s worldliness.” Hence in a social system that withholds experience and knowledge from women and children, they are neglected: “wronged child, wronged wife.”

 Cecilia, through her messy “stew” of a room and smoking of “Bolshevik cigarettes”, is portrayed as a mildly rebellious character. The literature associated with Cecilia and Robbie suggests their subversive nature: Cecilia prefers the “passionate” Fielding, while Robbie briefly attributes his obscene letter to Lady Chatterley’s Lover, a very much contemporary novel (written in 1928) which caused a moral outrage with its depiction of an illicit affair between an aristocratic woman and a working class man (the very situation in Atonement). These allusions associate Cecilia and Robbie with the increasing sexual liberation of the 1930s. However, Cecilia’s bohemian posturing and intellectual liberalism has a trite air to it, as Robbie observes: “her endearing attempt to seem eccentric, her stab at being bold had an exaggerated, homemade quality.” The self-conscious intellectualizing of emotion, or “Freudian smart-aleckery,” that both Cecilia and Robbie exhibit reveals their sexual innocence. Symbolically, Cecilia’s loss of virginity (her movement from innocence to experience) takes place in a library as she and Robbie exchange their literary substitutes for real love, their dry academic knowledge for the fruit of knowledge, “a life of facts” for “the facts of life”. This glorious monumental contravention of propriety is eloquently expressed by Robbie: “they had fucked while others sipped their cocktails on the terrace.” A feminist reading would suggest that McEwan, with the perspective of a twenty-first century writer, rejoices in the breaking of convention and in Cecilia’s emancipation from the sexual limitations of women. McEwan’s sympathetic portrayal of Cecilia and Robbie as the “romantic heroes” strengthens this argument,

 Thus in the movement from innocence to experience, it is the former, not the latter, that is culpable for the tragedy in the two novels. Experience did not corrupt innocence; the culture of suppression, of imposed ignorance masquerading as innocence, demonized experience: and so our protagonists, “on eating the apple” of knowledge, fall from Eden.
