. Evaluate macroeconomic policies that could be used to increase international competitiveness in the UK's export markets

Value of UK exports fell by 15%

International competitiveness is the ability to sell goods/services at a profit in overseas markets. International competitiveness can be increased through policies such as.

One policy that may increase international competitiveness is an expansionary monetary policy. When the Bank of England (BoE) lowers interest rates, the return on assets, such as bonds, is reduced. Consequently, investors may shift their capital to countries with higher interest rates, as they seek higher returns. This capital outflow from the UK results in decreased demand for Pounds, exerting downward pressure on the UK exchange rate.
This exchange rate depreciation can benefit UK export markets, such as the automobile industry. The depreciation of the Pound relative to foreign currencies means that it takes fewer units of foreign currency to purchase the same amount of British automobiles. As a result, the purchasing power parity of foreign currency holders increases. In turn, this makes British cars more internationally attractive, as they become relatively cheaper for foreign consumers. The lower exchange rate effectively makes British exports more competitive in global markets, potentially leading to an increase in demand for UK products, including automobiles, from international buyers

However, depreciation to the pound could have adverse effects, particularly for the UK's two major export markets, namely automobiles and gas turbines, as they heavily rely on overseas components for 70% of their manufacturing processes. The potential consequence could be cost-push inflation, caused by an increase in unit costs. To mitigate these higher costs, UK export markets may find it necessary to pass on these cost increases to the international market. This could work against the objective of improving international competitiveness because the price of UK exports would rise, potentially leading to a decrease in the quantity demanded by foreign buyers. Yet, this ultimately depends on whether UK export markets choose to transition from sourcing components overseas to domestic suppliers and the specific magnitude of the expansionary policy. Effects of monetary policy do not occur instantaneously, estimates suggest that it takes between one and two years for monetary policy to reach its maximum effect. Therefore, any increase to UK international competitiveness may only be possible in the long run. A more aggressive expansionary policy with lower interest rates/longer duration may lead to a more substantial depreciation of the pound. Which in turn could have a more pronounced impact on export competitiveness and cost-push inflation. Conversely, a shorter-lived/milder policy may have a less significant effect.


A-Level economics paper

06:08 pm

1a) 4/5

Externalities are spillover effects that are outside the transaction/price mechanism and affect third parties. In the instance of food-delivery markets in the UK, there is a negative consumption externality, consumers who order fast food are purchasing fast food “high in sugar, fat and salt”, private cost is higher than social cost - which is not taken into account by the price mechanism. The social cost is the cost on the taxpayer through the NHS.

1b) 8 marker ⅝  mention coefficient, mention as seen in Extract B… 

The demand for delivered food is likely to be price inelastic. This is because as outlined by the exact one consumption group for delivered food are “cash rice professionals”, which indicates higher incomes, thus higher disposable incomes. The average spend of “20 pound” is likely to thus be an insignificant portion of income expenditure. Therefore, if prices increase significantly/negligibly there will be a disproportionate effect on quantity demanded of delivered food by the group “cash rich professionals”, which means a price increase is likely to lead to an insignificant decrease in quantity demanded. However, 

The demand for delivered food is more likely to be income elastic this is because a rise/decrease in income, would highly effect the quantity demanded for delivered food. This is because as incomes fall, the average spend per customer of “20 pound” as outlined by the extract becomes a larger % spent of income expenditure, therefore consumers are more likely to switch to cheaper alternatives such as cooking at home, which the extract outlines as “5 times cheaper”. Given the availability of substitutes, such as home-cooked meals, it can be said demand for delivered food is income elastic. However, this may only be the case in the long-run as those reliant on delivered food may not possess the skills to prepare home cooked meals, so for new substitutes (home food) to enter, a sufficient amount of time is needed to pass. 


d) Evaluate the microeconomic and macroeconomic effects of a depreciation of the pound.

Higher import costs, therefore higher cost of production. Lower profits and higher prices, uk tourism might be boosted by depreciation by local restaurants, however ingredient costs are not the most significant costs rent and delivery.
Firms may offset costs through altering portion size. 
Marshall lerner, j curve

The Marshall-Lerner condition is a criterion that determines whether a country's balance of trade will improve or worsen in response to a change in the exchange rate. It is based on the idea that a depreciation of the currency (a decrease in the exchange rate) will lead to an improvement in the balance of trade if the sum of the price elasticities of demand for the country's exports and imports is greater than one. In other words, if the demand for a country's exports and imports is more sensitive to changes in price than the supply of these goods, the balance of trade will improve after the currency depreciates.

The “J Curve effect” shows the possible time lags between a falling currency and an improved trade balance. Initially, a country’s external trade deficit (X-M) might increase following a currency depreciation.
The effect of currency depreciation on the trade deficit depends on price elasticity of demand for exports & imports. The J Curve effect says a trade deficit can worsen after depreciation, but improve if the Marshall-Lerner condition holds.
The J-curve effect refers to the phenomenon in which a country's balance of trade initially worsens after it devalues its currency or otherwise reduces its trade barriers. This occurs because the lower exchange rate makes imports more expensive, while exports become cheaper and more competitive in the global market. As a result, demand for the country's exports may increase, leading to an improvement in the balance of trade over time. The improvement in the balance of trade is represented by the upward slope of the "J" shape, hence the name "J-curve effect."
The J-curve effect is often used to describe the expected outcomes of trade policy changes, but it is not a universally observed phenomenon and may not occur in all cases.


Depreciation refers to the relative weakening of a currency, in this case Pounds sterling, against other foreign currency e.g. “USD, PHP” which means less British pounds can buy the same amount of foreign imported goods.

One effect of a depreciation of the pound is an increase in variable costs for businesses. Any depreciation of the pound will mean that more pounds sterling is now needed to purchase the same amount of foreign goods. For instance, British restaurants who are purchasing ingredients such as “wagyu beef, rice” from abroad will now have to pay more for the same quantity. This increases the variable costs of businesses, smaller firms in particular such as “family owned businesses” may be unable to absorb these costs and in order to remain in the restaurant market, will have to lay off employees or switch to lower-quality alternative ingredients. Furthermore, depending on the magnitude of the depreciation i.e. “The pound falls 25% against the dollar”, the smallest firms with the lowest financial reserves may leave the restaurant industry. However, to counter-evaluate in the long-run this may not be the case as enough time has passed for restaurants to find adequate replacement for foreign ingredients i.e. “switching to a domestic ingredient supplier”, therefore in the long-run firms may not result in shutting down or laying of employees. 

A macroeconomic effect of this is that there is an increase into the circular flow of income, if firms start searching for domestic alternatives rather than buying from foreign producers, this means there are less leakages/withdrawals from the economy into foreign ingredient markets - rather this money is spent in the UK economy, e.g. supporting local farmers. However, to counter evaluate this may not be the case for particular restaurant such as “luxury restaurants” where consumers are more price inelastic and are willing to pay a higher price for meals, regardless if due to pricier ingredients they pay a higher bill. Such that luxury restaurants may continue to import items such as “wagyu beef" and " tuna” from foreign companies such as Japan. Therefore, it can be said the increase into the circular flow of income is debatable, as luxury firms will still indirectly cause leakages by continuing to purchase from foreign ingredient providers. 

In conclusion, any depreciation of the pound results in imports becoming more expensive as explained through the rising price of foreign ingredients for restaurants. I believe that the microeconomic downsides such as the closing of the smallest firms outweigh the macroeconomic positives such as increased demand for domestic ingredients. This is because any depreciation is ultimately most regressive for the smallest firms which cannot cover their variable costs, and are forced into shutdown point because of this. This outweighs any positive macroeconomic effect as once these small firms exit the market, the market type for restaurants becomes more oligopolistic as the largest firms remain in the market, taking over more market share, and thus can result in higher consumer prices due to their higher price setting power.


d) decreasing interest rates 25 marker
When Robert Matsiko was a young man his grain‑milling business in eastern Africa was destroyed by fire. Now, after building it back up from the ashes, he is being hurt by high interest rates. To buy a new machine he must borrow from a bank at an annual rate of 22%. 'You fear to do that,' Mr Matsiko says. Many other entrepreneurs feel the same, which stops their businesses from growing, although very small firms can get help from microfinance schemes. Kenya’s central bank rate has fallen from over 20% to 7% in the last decade, but the rates charged to small businesses and individuals are much higher than the central bank interest rate. In sub‑Saharan Africa, the gap between saving and borrowing rates is higher than anywhere else. The average bank lends at 6.8% above the central bank interest rate. Mobile banking, credit‑information sharing and innovation have helped to bring borrowing costs down. But until birth rates fall, interest rates will stay relatively high, because families with many children cannot afford to save

Lower cost to businesses fixed costs fall and increase, competitiveness,
Allows firms to be more dynamically efficient, higher consumer defend as consumption increases, greater consumer surplus through competitiveness, impact on kenyas housing market…lower prices for consumers,

Macro effects, easier to borrow so C + I increases, talk about 60% hence AD rises, with multiplier effects. Potential lras shifts


To counter evaluate, interet rate not only cost for firms, central bank rate may not be the rate individuals can access, magnitude of interest rate, 
One macroeconomic effect of decreasing interest rates in Kenya is an increase in consumption, spending. This is because consumers and firms are now incentivised to access finance through “credit cards, business loans” more due to the lower interest they will have to pay back, which increases their marginal propensity to consume. In theory this will lead to a rise in consumption and investment as consumers can now finance more purchases and firms can take out more loans for projects such as “infrastructure/machinery”. This in turn will lead to an outwards shift of AD as Consumption is 60% of AD and investment is another component of AD. However, this is ultimately dependent on the magnitude of the decrease in interest rate, if a negligible decrease occurs firms/consumers may not be more incentivised to take out loans/credit cards thus there will be an insigifnicant increase in consumption.

A microeconomic effect of decreasing interest rates may be a decrease of monopolies in Kenya. For example, if firms can access business loans at a cheaper rate, the high barriers to entry in monopolistic markets such as “construction” decrease. For example sunk costs such as buying the machinery, may not pose as high a barrier to entry as pre-decreasing interest rates, as new firms can simply finance this purchase through loans, they pay back later at a lower rate. This means that firms once unable to enter such markets, due to not having financial economies of scale, can enter and finance investment into machinery and infrastructure, this paves way for competition within markets as incumbent firms now have to spend more money into R&D to maintain their market share against newly entering firms. This may lead to consumer surplus increasing as firms compete against each other to offer the most attractive prices/highest quality goods. 

An additional macroeconomic effect of decreasing interest rates in Kenya is inflation, if AD is to increase as a result of decreasing interest rates, price levels will shift outwards from P1 to P2, due to the increased level of AD in the Kenyan economy. This may be regressive as Kenyans on the lowest income band may be unable to afford necessity goods such as food, oil, fuel. Thus negating the initial positives such as an increased MPC. For example, Kenyans on the lowest income bands may be more able to finance investment such as “buying cattle/farmland” to raise income through their milk production/crop yield - however in the same long-run, a price-level increase in the Kenyan economy will subsequently result in variable costs such as “fertiliser, cattle feed etc” rising. One could thus argue the benefits of increased consumption in the economy, such as higher GDP/AD/investment etc, will negate itself as if price-levels rise, according to the law of demand, consumption will naturally cut back due to the new price level being a higher proportion spent of disposable Kenyan income.

To conclude, decreasing interest rates will have a two-fold effect on the Kenyan economy. Firstly, while yes ad may increase due to higher consumption and investment into the kenyan economy, it can also be said investment, particularly foreign investment will decrease due to foreign firms not getting the best return for their savings  - which can also lead to lower foreign currency reserves. I believe that decreasing interest rates cannot be decoupled from inflation, which although an indicator of a “boom/economic growth” is ultimately regressive to the lowest income band, which are the ones who benefit most from lower interest rates for credit cards - as they could initially benefit from lower interest rates as they can finance cattle etc, but the benefits will be outweighed as the prices of daily goods increases. 

